


= MMSNP - Monadic Monotone SNP =

Defined in [FV93] as a subclass of SNP.  There are three syntactic restrictions defining the subclass MMSNP, based on the form of the SNP formula defining the language:

The second order existentially quantified variables, known as the proof relations, are restricted to be monadic.  (Monadic relations can be treated as sets.)
 Any relations in the formula other than the proof relations must occur only negated (the formula is monotone).
 No inequality relations can occur in the formula.

MMSNP seems to obey dichotomy, by excluding languages that are NP-intermediate.  This is still open but widely believed.  Dropping any of the restrictions monotone/monadic/without inequalities allows NP-intermediate languages unless P = NP, since any problem in NP is polynomial time equivalent to a problem in each of these broader classes.  MMSNP therefore seems to be a maximal fragment of NP where NP-intermediate languages are excluded.

Every constraint satisfaction problem with a fixed target structure is expressible in MMSNP, and there is a polynomial time Turing reduction from every MMSNP query to finitely many constraint satisfaction problems.  MMSNP therefore seems to capture the class of constraint satisfaction problems with fixed templates, CSP.

Defined in [FV93] as a subclass of SNP, where the second order existentially quantified variables are sets (monadic) and any relations in the first-order part occur negated (monotone).  Further, no inequalities can occur in the first-order part.

MMSNP seems to obey dichotomy, by excluding Ladner languages.  This is still open but widely believed.  Dropping any of the restrictions monotone/monadic/without inequalities          allows Ladner languages unless P = NP, since any problem in NP is polynomial time equivalent to a problem in each of these broader classes.  MMSNP therefore seems to be a maximal fragment of NP where Ladner languages are excluded.

Every constraint satisfaction problem is expressible in MMSNP, and there is a polynomial time Turing reduction from every MMSNP query to finitely many constraint satisfaction problems.  MMSNP therefore seems to capture the class of constraint satisfaction problems.