


= SZK - Statistical Zero Knowledge =

The class of decision problems for which a "yes" answer can be verified by a statistical zero-knowledge proof protocol.  In such an interactive proof
(see IP), we have a probabilistic polynomial-time verifier, and a prover who has unbounded computational resources.  By exchanging messages with the prover, the verifier must become convinced (with high probability) that the answer is "yes," without learning anything else about the problem (statistically).

What does that mean?  For each choice of random coins, the verifier has a "view" of his entire interaction with prover, consisting of his random coins as well as all messages sent back and forth.  Then the distribution over views resulting from interaction with the prover has to be statistically close to a distribution that the verifier could generate himself (in polynomial-time), without interacting with anyone.  (Here "statistically close" means that, say, the trace distance is at most 1/10.)

The most famous example of such a protocol is for graph nonisomorphism. Given two graphs G and H, the verifier picks at random one of the graphs (each with probability 1/2), permutes its vertices randomly, sends the resulting graph to the prover, and asks, "Which graph did I start with, G or H?"  If G and H are non-isomorphic, the prover can always answer correctly (since he can use exponential time), but if they're isomorphic, he can answer correctly with probability at most 1/2. Thus, if the prover always gives the correct answer, then the verifier becomes convinced the graphs are not isomorphic.  On the other hand, the verifier already knew which graph (G or H) he started with, so he could simulate his entire view of the interaction himself, without the prover's help.

If that sounds like a complicated definition, well, it is.  But it turns out that SZK has extremely nice properties. [Oka96] showed that:

SZK is closed under complement.  E.g., a verifier can verify in zero-knowledge that two graphs are isomorphic, not only that they aren't. 
We can assume without loss of generality that the whole interaction consists of a constant number of messages.
Amazingly, we can also assume without loss of generality that the protocol is public-coin. That is, the verifier (often called Arthur) doesn't need to hide any of his random bits, as he did in the graph nonisomorphism protocol above, but can just send them all to the prover (called Merlin)!
Finally, we can assume without loss of generality that the verifier (Arthur) is honest. A dishonest verifier would be one that tries to learn something about the problem (violating the zero-knowledge requirement) by deviating from the protocol.

Subsequently, [SV97] showed that SZK has a natural complete promise problem, called Statistical Difference (SD).  Given two polynomial-size circuits, C,,0,, and C,,1,,, let D,,0,, and D,,1,, be the distributions over their respective outputs when they're given as input a uniformly random n-bit string.  We're promised that D,,0,, and D,,1,, have trace distance either at most 1/3 or at least 2/3; the problem is to decide which is the case.

Note: The constants 1/3 and 2/3 can be amplified to 2^-poly(n)^ and 1-2^-poly(n)^ respectively.  But it is crucial that (2/3)^2^ > 1/3.

Another complete promise problem for SZK is Entropy Difference (ED) [GV99].  Here we're promised that either H(D,,0,,)>H(D,,1,,)+1 or H(D,,1,,)>H(D,,0,,)+1, where the distributions D,,0,, and D,,1,, are as above, and H denotes Shannon entropy.  The problem is to determine which is the case.

If any hard-on-average language is in SZK, then one-way functions exist [Ost91].

See general zero-knowledge (ZK).

Contains PZK and NISZK, and is contained in AM ∩ coAM, as well as CZK and QSZK.

There exists an oracle relative to which SZK is not in BQP [Aar02].

Contained in DQP [Aar02b].

The class of decision problems for which a "yes" answer can be verified by a statistical zero-knowledge proof protocol.  In such a protocol, we have a BPP (i.e. probabilistic polynomial-time) verifier, Arthur, and a prover, Merlin, who has unbounded computational resources.  By sending messages back and forth with Merlin, Arthur must become convinced (with high probability) that the answer is "yes," without learning anything else about the problem (statistically).

What does that mean?  For each choice of random coins, Arthur has a "view" of his entire interaction with Merlin, consisting of his random coins as well as all messages sent back and forth.  Then the distribution over views resulting from interaction with Merlin has to be statistically close to a distribution that Arthur could generate himself (in polynomial-time), without interacting with Merlin.  (Here "statistically close" means that, say, the trace distance is at most 1/10.)

The most famous example of such a protocol is for graph nonisomorphism. Given two graphs G and H, Arthur can pick one of the graphs (each with probability 1/2), permute its vertices randomly, send the resulting graph to Merlin, and ask, "Which graph did I start with, G or H?"  If G and H are non-isomorphic, Merlin can always answer correctly (since he can use exponential time), but if they're isomorphic, he can answer correctly with probability at most 1/2. Thus, if Merlin always gives the correct answer, Arthur becomes convinced the graphs are not isomorphic.  On the other hand, Arthur already knew which graph (G or H) he started with, so he could simulate his entire view of the interaction himself, without Merlin's help.

SZK is closed under complement.  I.e. Arthur can verify in zero-knowledge that two graphs are isomorphic, not only that they aren't. We can assume without loss of generality that the whole interaction consists of a constant number of messages.
Amazingly, we can also assume without loss of generality that the protocol is public-coin. I.e. Arthur doesn't need to hide any of his random bits, as he did in the graph nonisomorphism protocol above, but can just send them all to Merlin!
Finally, we can assume without loss of generality that the verifier (Arthur) is honest. A dishonest verifier would be one that tries to learn something about the problem (violating the zero-knowledge requirement) by deviating from the protocol.

Zero-knowledge proofs were first studied in [GMW91], [GMR89].